# regHAMR
A wrapper program that takes the user through the entire HAMR analysis pipeline in just 2 commands.

## SMACK
Short for "Suite for Modification or Annotation-purposed Cleaning and Keeping", this program takes in an SRR accession list from a given RNA sequencing experiment and outputs read alignments, HAMR modification tables, rep consensus files, library overlap files, etc. 
USAGE:
```
SMACK.sh <SRA Accession list.txt> <SE/PE> <trim requirement T/F> <repo dir> <genome.fasta> 
        <annotation.gff3> <bowtie dir> <sam filter.pl> <hamr model.Rdata> <read length> <name table.csv>
        <ant lib> <out dir> <#cores>
```
```SRA Accession list.txt```: # A list of SRR accession numbers generated from SRA run selector tool, usually represent the sequencing data of an entire experiment, .txt file

```SE/PE```: Whether paired-end or single-end sequencing was used

```trim requirement T/F```: Whether the data downloaded are pre-trimmed or untrimmed fastq files. If you want SMACK to trim it, put F

```repo dir```: A directory containing all extra packages needed (sra, hamr)

```genome.fasta```: The genome file of your model organism, .fasta file

```annotation.gff3```: The annotation file of your model organism (recommend same source to genome), .gff3 file

```bowtie dir```: The bowtie annotation directory from your bowtie step

```sam filter.pl```: The provided filtering file, .pl file

```hamr model.Rdata```: The provided trained model for HAMR, .Rdata file

```read length```: The length of your reads (usually ranging from 50~200)

```name table.csv```: A table corresponding each SRR file to the actual condition or sample name of each sequencing data, for the ease of downstream analysis, .csv file

```ant lib```: A folder with annotation libraries of your model organism as generated by running [Diep's script]

```out dir```: Your desired output directory

```#cores```: number of threads this process can use


## EXTRACT
This program takes in a project directory (the out dir argument you supplied into SMACK), and returns R generated plots, graphs, and tables.
USAGE:
```
USAGE: EXTRACT.sh <proj dir> <knownant> <distTECH> <distGENO> <gene annotation file>
```
```proj dir```: Project directory, the same one you fed into SMACK

```knownant```: The csv (in modtbl format) of the known mod you want analyzed in distToKnownMod

```trim requirement T/F```: The seq_tech of the sample group you want analyzed in distToKnownMod

```repo dir```: The genotype of the sample group you want analyzed in distToKnownMod

```genome.fasta```: The gene annotation file for your organism, obtained with Diep's code

NOTE in these analyses, the term overlap type might be mentioned. This refers to the kind of library we wish to use to select HAMR modifications for analysis. For example, the 3UTR type selects all HAMR mods that were predicted that lie within the 3' UTR of any given transcript as per indicated in the gtf file provided. The available types include: gene, 3UTR, 5UTR, CDS, mRNA. (case sensitive)


### fasterq-dumpAdaptor
We had difficulty installing sratoolkit and using the newest functions, so I created this script to manually use it but still high throughput. A quick tutorial:

First, install the relative sratoolkit manually from https://github.com/ncbi/sra-tools/wiki/01.-Downloading-SRA-Toolkit 

Next, create an SRR accession list (in .txt format) using the SRA run selector tool. Locate both your sratoolkit and your .txt.

USAGE: 
```
fasterq-dumpAdaptor.sh <sratoolkit dir> <accession.txt> <out dir> <SE/PE> <T/F> <cores>
```
```sratoolkit dir```: where your sratoolkit is located.

```accession.txt```: where your accession txt list is located.

```out dir```: where you want your final fastq files to be.

```SE/PE```: Specify PE for paired-end or SE for single-end.

```T/F```: Specify T for pretrimmed datasets, otherwise the program will run trim-galore.

```cores```: Available threads availble for use.

NOTE: add an empty line below the last line of SRR accession number in your .txt file before you run.

### fastq2hamr
a shell wrapper program that takes in an adaptor-trimmed fastq file all the way to applying HAMR, yielding intermediates and hamr prediction table
this is representative of the operational pipeline used to analyze data generated from wt-mta GMUCT and RNA-seq. The pipeline includes the preparing/cleaning steps recommended by Vandivier et al. https://link.springer.com/protocol/10.1007/978-1-4939-8808-2_4

USAGE: 
```
fastq2hamr.sh <sample.fastq> <anotation.gtf/gff3> <bowtie dir> <genome.fasta> <sorting_script.pl> <hamr_model.Rdata> <out dir> <mismatch_num>
```
```sample.fastq```: a fastq file that is adaptor-processed using trim-galore or cutadapt. Use fastqc to monitor the quality of trimmed and pre-trimmed fastq files in case of anomalies.

```anotation.gtf/gff3```: these are specific to the model organism you are working with and can be obtained through various databanks, a simple googling should work.

```bowtie dir```: this requires you to build a bowtie dictionary before-hand, via:
```
bowtie2-build <genome.fa> <output directory>
```
In addition, a dictionary is needed along some steps, create via:
```
java YOURDIR/picard.jar CreateSequenceDictionary R=genome.fa O=genome.dict
```

```genome.fasta```: also specific to your model organism, can be obtained via googling.

```sorting_script.pl```: a script developed for internal use.

```hamr_model.Rdata```: can be found under HAMR/models/euk_trna_mods.Rdata.

```out dir```: the directory where your intermediate files and your output table will be located.

```mismatch_num```: gather the sequencing length from the fastqc step, use 0.06 to multiply the sequencing length to obtain this number


### findConsensus

This is the step directly upstream of consensusOverlap, it takes in a directory of hamr outputs and returns consensus bed files for each sample group found in said directory.

Note: No R variables returned, and do NOT end the directory string with "/". 
For example, "MyDir/MySubDir" is good, "MyDir/MySubDir/" is bad.

Nomenclature requirement: within the directory, each .txt file must follow the form: "GENOTYPE_SEQTECH_rep#.mod.txt"

USAGE:
```
Rscript findConsensus.R <mod dir> <consensus dir>
```

```mod dir```: where your hamr outputs are located

```consensus dir```: where you want your consensus bed files to be located 


### consensusOverlap
Script to overlap consensus mods with various libraries (UTR, CDS, gene, etc.) after post HAMR processing in R, the libraries are obtained in various banks like TAIR.

USAGE: 
```
consensusOverlap.sh <consensus.bed> <cds.bed> <utr.bed> <gene.bed> <mrna.bed> <out dir>
```
```consensus.bed```: a bed file obtained from processing hamr predicted mod tables and keeping union/intersection of mods between biological replicates. 

```cds.bed | utr.bed | gene.bed | mrna.bed```: annotated coding region for a given organism, obtainable via gtf/gff3 files. Please see https://github.com/dtrain16/NGS-scripts/blob/master/TAIR10_annotation.sh for example.

```out dir```: where you want your overlap outputs to be, note that the bed file will be individually overlapped with all 4 library bed annotations, so 4 outputs will be generated. 


### allLapPrep

This is the step directly downstream of consensusOverlap, it takes in the overlaps and process them into a single long dataframe containing all the experimental and hamr prediction information, the long dataframe will be outputted as a .csv file.

Note: as mentioned in findConsensus, do NOT end the directory string with "/".

Nomenclature requirement: each .bed file must follow the form "GENOTYPE_SEQTECH_LAP.bed"

USAGE:
```
Rscript allLapPrep.R <overlap dir> <out dir>
```

```overlap dir```: where the outputs of consensusOverlap is located.

```out dir```: where you want your csv output to be located.

### abundByLap.R

Takes in a longdf file generated by allLapPrep and returns 2 plots that visualizes the abundancy by counts of each type of mod in each experimental group. One plot is by group, the other plot is by mod type.

USAGE:
```
Rscript abundByLap.R <longdf.csv> <overlap type> <out dir>
```

```longdf.csv```: the hamr output in longdf.csv format processed by allLapPrep

```overlap type```: the overlap type you'd like to use to subset the mods

```out dir```: where you want your plot output to be located.

### clusterAnalysis.R

Takes in a longdf file generated by allLapPrep and returns 2 tables that informs the clustering condition by mod type and experimental group, and the locations on the genome at which mods tend to cluster. We define for example 3 mods to be clustered if they are the same type and are within 2 bp of each other. 

USAGE:
```
Rscript clusterAnalysis.R <longdf.csv> <out dir>
```

```longdf.csv```: the hamr output in longdf.csv format processed by allLapPrep

```out dir```: where you want your table output to be located.

### distToKnownMod.R

Takes in a longdf file generated by allLapPrep and returns a plot that illustrates the physical distribution of HAMR predicted mods in respect with a known mod, or experimentally determined mod, etc. 

USAGE:
```
Rscript distToKnownMod.R <longdf.csv> <knownmod.csv> <lap_type> <seq_tech> <genotype> <out dir>
```

```longdf.csv```: the hamr output in longdf.csv format processed by allLapPrep

```knownmod.csv```: a record of all known mod in modtbl format

```lap_type```: the kind of overlap type you'd like to use to subset the mods

```seq_tech```: one of the experimental group parameters, common ones are GMUCT and mRNA, specific to experiment

```genotype```: the genotype of your disired experimental group

```out dir```: where you want your plot output to be located


### modDistribution.R

Takes in a longdf file generated by allLapPrep and returns 2 plots that illustrates the physical distribution of HAMR predicted mods along the normalized unit transcript

USAGE:
```
Rscript modDistribution.R <longdf.csv> <geneannotation.bed> <out dir>
```

```longdf.csv```: the hamr output in longdf.csv format processed by allLapPrep

```geneannotation.bed```: a record of all gene with annotation of its regions, obtained via Diep's code

```out dir```: where you want your plot output to be located



